Implement `:currency` function in the default registry (#915)
unicode-org/message-format-wg: spec/registry.md

  - ([digit size option](#digit-size-options))
- `maximumSignificantDigits`
  - ([digit size option](#digit-size-options))
- `trailingZeroDisplay`
  - `auto` (default)
  - `stripIfInteger`
- `roundingPriority`
  - `auto` (default)
  - `morePrecision`
  - `lessPrecision`
- `roundingIncrement`

>   - 1 (default), 2, 5, 10, 20, 25, 50, 100, 200, 250, 500, 1000, 2000, 2500, and 5000

Reviewer: For the future (not first release)

I know that this follows https://402.ecma-international.org/#:~:text=not%20the%20exponent.-,%5B%5BRoundingIncrement%5D%5D,-is%20an%20integer. 

That list is limited to powers of 10 from 1 to 4.

> evenly divides 10, 100, 1000, or 10000 into tenths, fifths, quarters, or halves

Given that currency values (due to hyperinflation) can range much higher than that, that seems like an arbitrary limit, and it should just be "a power of 10", and just limited by the implementation datatypes (as usual).

Author: Yeah, I closed my eyes while importing this.

#### Options

Some options do not have default values defined in this specification.
The defaults for these options are implementation-dependent.
In general, the default values for such options depend on the locale, 
the currency,
the value of other options, or all of these.

Fraction digits for currency values behave differently than for other numeric formatters.
The number of fraction digits displayed is usually set by the currency used.
For example, USD uses 2 fraction digits, while JPY uses none.
Setting `fractionDigits` to `none` makes the display and selection work similar to `:integer`.
Setting some other number of `fractionDigits` allows greater precision display
(such as when performing currency conversions or other specialized operations)

> [!NOTE]
> Except where noted otherwise, the names of _options_ and their _values_ were derived from the
> [options](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Intl/NumberFormat/NumberFormat#options)
> in JavaScript's `Intl.NumberFormat`.

The following options and their values are required to be available on the function `:currency`:
- `select`

>    -  `plural` (default; see [Default Value of `select` Option](#default-value-of-select-option) below)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   -  `plural` (default)
```

of the _operand_ of the annotated _expression_,
together with the resolved options' values.

### The `:currency` function

The function `:currency` is an OPTIONAL selector and formatter for currency values, 
which are a specialized form of numeric selection and formatting.

#### `:currency` Operands

The function `:currency` requires a [Currency Operand](#currency-operands) as its _operand_
or a [Number Operand](#number-operands), if used with the _option_ `currency`.

#### Options

Some options do not have default values defined in this specification.
The defaults for these options are implementation-dependent.
In general, the default values for such options depend on the locale, 
the currency,
the value of other options, or all of these.

Fraction digits for currency values behave differently than for other numeric formatters.
The number of fraction digits displayed is usually set by the currency used.
For example, USD uses 2 fraction digits, while JPY uses none.

> Setting `fractionDigits` to `none` makes the display and selection work similar to `:integer`.

Reviewer 2: Given this, how would `fractionDigits=none` be different from `fractionDigits=0`? Why is a name needed in addition to the numerical value?

Author: My thinking is that `fractionDigits=auto` is the high-runner case and `fractionDigits=none` is in second place. It's semantically different than setting a specific number of digits?

There might be rounding mode differences, I suppose: I didn't deal with rounding mode. Otherwise, there is no difference.

Reviewer 2: I would rather strongly prefer dropping `none`.

Author: It was removed.

(such as when performing currency conversions or other specialized operations)

> [!NOTE]
> Except where noted otherwise, the names of _options_ and their _values_ were derived from the
> [options](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Intl/NumberFormat/NumberFormat#options)
> in JavaScript's `Intl.NumberFormat`.

The following options and their values are required to be available on the function `:currency`:
- `select`
   -  `plural` (default; see [Default Value of `select` Option](#default-value-of-select-option) below)
   -  `ordinal`
   -  `exact`
- `currency`
   - valid [Unicode Currency Identifier](https://cldr-smoke.unicode.org/spec/main/ldml/tr35.html#UnicodeCurrencyIdentifier)
     (no default)
- `compactDisplay` (this option only has meaning when combined with the option `notation=compact`)
   - `short` (default)
   - `long`
- `notation`
   - `standard` (default)
   - `compact`
- `numberingSystem`
   - valid [Unicode Number System Identifier](https://cldr-smoke.unicode.org/spec/main/ldml/tr35.html#UnicodeNumberSystemIdentifier)
     (default is locale-specific)
- `currencySign`
  - `accounting`
  - `standard` (default)

> - `currencyDisplay` (this option's values are derived from those in ICU NumberFormatter)
>   - `auto` (default)
>   - `narrow`
>   - `short`
>   - `iso`
>   - `full`
>   - `formal`
>   - `variant`

Reviewer 2: We should not mix-and-match sources like this, and here too use the Intl.NumberFormat values:
```suggestion
- `currencyDisplay`
  - `code`
  - `symbol` (default)
  - `narrowSymbol`
  - `name`
```

Author: I did this carefully and for a reason: there is no way in `Intl` to access important features, such as the alternate (`variant`) symbol (The Turkish lira is a problem here: the new `₺` symbol is not used for a lot of values vs. `TL`--and the symbols go on opposite sides of the number to boot) or for uses such as in-sentence presentation (JPY, CNY, TWD, and a few others have this, e.g. `￥123,457` vs. `123,457円`). I also omitted "hidden", which was not intentional.

We don't currently have an allowance for optional values. If "my" full list were mandated, Intl-based implementations could just alias the unsupported ones.

Reviewer 2: I would not be comfortable adding option values here that are not supported by Intl.NumberFormat. I think it's quite important for an MF2 formatter to be implementable with the pre-existing TC39 Intl formatters, and that using a completely different -- and wider -- set of values like this seems rather arbitrary, even if done intentionally.

I also find the proposed ICU NumberFormatter values to be significantly harder to decipher without reference to documentation, compared to the TC39 option values.

> We don't currently have an allowance for optional values.

I would support allowing implementations to support option values beyond the set we define.

Author: I think we should discuss it. My tendency is to agree with you, but...

In the course of writing the text (and my replies) I found several bugs in ICU4J 76 RC. I'm more-than-averagely sensitive to currency formatting details and, thus, am concerned that we don't end up where parts of ICU have been: unable to reach the solutions already present in CLDR.

- `useGrouping`
  - `auto` (default)
  - `always`
  - `never`
  - `min2`
- `minimumIntegerDigits`
  - ([digit size option](#digit-size-options), default: `1`)
- `fractionDigits` (unlike number/integer formats, the fraction digits for currency formatting are fixed)
  - `auto` (default) (the number of digits used by the currency)
  - `none`
  - ([digit size option](#digit-size-options))
- `minimumSignificantDigits`
  - ([digit size option](#digit-size-options))
- `maximumSignificantDigits`
  - ([digit size option](#digit-size-options))

If the _operand_ of the _expression_ is an implementation-defined type,
such as the _resolved value_ of an _expression_ with a `:currency` _annotation_,
it can include option values.
These are included in the resolved option values of the _expression_,
with _options_ on the _expression_ taking priority over any option values of the _operand_.

> For example, the _placeholder_ in this _message_:
> ```
> .input {$n :currency currency=USD fractionDigits=none}
> {{{$n :currency currencySign=accounting}}}
> ```
> would be formatted with the resolved options
> `{ currencySign: 'accounting', fractionDigits: 'none', currency: 'USD' }`.

> ##### Default Value of `select` Option

Reviewer 2: This section, and in fact all the text around selection, should be left out and replaced with a reference to `:number`. As is, having this text copied here is confusing.

`currency` is provided.
The option `currency` MUST NOT be used to override the currency of an implementation-defined type.
Using this option in such a case results in a _Bad Option_ error.

The value of the _operand_'s `currency` MUST be either a string containing a
valid [Unicode Currency Identifier](https://cldr-smoke.unicode.org/spec/main/ldml/tr35.html#UnicodeCurrencyIdentifier)
or an implementation-defined currency type.

A [Number Operand](#number-operands) without a `currency` _option_ results in a _Bad Operand_ error.

> [!NOTE]
> For example, in ICU4J, the type `com.ibm.icu.util.CurrencyAmount` can be used
> to set the amount and currency.

> [!NOTE]
> For runtime environments that do not provide a ready-made data structure,
> class, or type for currency values, the implementation ought to provide
> a data structure, convenience function, or documentation on how to encode
> the value and currency code for formatting.
> For example, such an implementation might define a "currency operand"
> to include a key-value structure with specific keys to be the
> local currency operand, which might look like the following:
> ```json

> > "operandName": {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> {
```

> the value and currency code for formatting.
> For example, such an implementation might define a "currency operand"
> to include a key-value structure with specific keys to be the
> local currency operand, which might look like the following:
> ```json
> {
>    "value": 123.45,
>    "currency": "EUR"
> }
> ```

#### Options

Some options do not have default values defined in this specification.
The defaults for these options are implementation-dependent.
In general, the default values for such options depend on the locale, 
the currency,
the value of other options, or all of these.

Fraction digits for currency values behave differently than for other numeric formatters.
The number of fraction digits displayed is usually set by the currency used.
For example, USD uses 2 fraction digits, while JPY uses none.
Setting some other number of `fractionDigits` allows greater precision display
(such as when performing currency conversions or other specialized operations)
or disabling fraction digits if set to `0`.
The special _option_ _value_ `hideIfWhole` is used to display values without
fraction digits when the number of fraction digits is zero,

> or based on the currency when the number of fraction digits for the currency is non-zero.

Reviewer 2: This should be left out. This is novel currency formatting behaviour, and we should not be introducing it here via message formatting. Is this already somehow supported in ICU4J and ICU4C? If this makes sense for formatting currencies, wouldn't this also make sense for many other number formatting situations?

I do not object to a value like this in principle, but I object to it being introduced _here_.

Author: This value is supported by ICU.

The use cases for currencies are more common than for other number values (with the possible exception of units). Normally one is trying to get consistent widths (or one doesn't care). With currency values you generally want a specific number of fractional digits or no fraction digits. Mutation of the value to produce this is undesirable.

However, I agree that this is "special sauce" and shouldn't be _required_ here. Should we introduce **optional** values?

Reviewer 2: As we allow for implementations to support option values beyond the ones we explicitly define, the easiest way of making this optional is to leave it out for now. This would also more clearly allow for an implementation that did not support "hide if whole" fraction display to emit an error, rather than be required to fail silently.

> This value is supported by ICU.

Could you give me a pointer to how/where this is supported? I could not find this myself.

Reviewer 2: Ah, thank you, I was looking for it among the precision options, as that's how it's presented here. Finding it for ICU let me also find the corresponding [JS option](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Intl/NumberFormat/NumberFormat#trailingzerodisplay), which to no-one's surprise has a different spelling: `trailingZeroDisplay: 'stripIfInteger'`.

So let me amend my position here, and reiterate what I've stated previously: I'm fine with any subset of the Intl formatters and their options. In this case, I think we should add this as a separate option, following the TC39 nomenclature. This will also allow us to add it for `:number`.

I would be happy for us to include other rounding options for `:number` and related functions, which were previously left out.

Author: I can add the separate option using the Intl spelling. Do you have a list of other options to add?

Reviewer 2: We're missing the following, which could well be added in a separate PR:
- `roundingPriority`
  - `auto` (default)
  - `morePrecision`
  - `lessPrecision`
- `roundingIncrement`
  - 1 (default), 2, 5, 10, 20, 25, 50, 100, 200, 250, 500, 1000, 2000, 2500, and 5000
- `roundingMode`
  - `ceil`
  - `floor`
  - `expand`
  - `trunc`
  - `halfCeil`
  - `halfFloor`
  - `halfExpand` (default)
  - `halfTrunc`
  - `halfEven`

Author: I can't do this right this second, but will add these to this PR. Should they be optional or standard? I'm leaning towards standard. 

Almost all of our work between now and 46.1 appears to be fixing up the registry/function set, plus some housekeeping.

Reviewer 2: > Should they be optional or standard?

I'm fine either way.

> Almost all of our work between now and 46.1 appears to be fixing up the registry/function set, plus some housekeeping.

Good!

Author: Added. I made them standard.

@mihnita @catamorphism Please note this (proposed) change.

> ```
> The special price is $5.
> ```
> But like this when when value is `5.01 USD`:
> ```
> The special price is $5.01.
> ```

Implementations MAY internally alias option values that they do not have data or a backing implementation for.
Notably, the `currencyDisplay` option has a rich set of values that mirrors developments in CLDR data.
Some implementations might not be able to produce all of these formats for every currency.

> [!NOTE]
> Except where noted otherwise, the names of _options_ and their _values_ were derived from the
> [options](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Intl/NumberFormat/NumberFormat#options)
> in JavaScript's `Intl.NumberFormat`.

> [!NOTE]
> The option `select` does not accept the value `ordinal` because selecting
> currency values using ordinal rules makes no sense.

The following options and their values are required to be available on the function `:currency`:
- `select`
   -  `plural` (default)
   -  `exact`
- `currency`
   - valid [Unicode Currency Identifier](https://cldr-smoke.unicode.org/spec/main/ldml/tr35.html#UnicodeCurrencyIdentifier)

>      (no default)

Reviewer 2: Just to check, an implementation that accepts all `currency` values that match `^[A-Z]{3}$` would be valid, yes? We should not be here requiring that each MF2 implementation carries with it a list of valid currency codes, and emits an error for currency codes not in that list.

Reviewer: ^[A-Z]{3}$ would be well-formed, but not necessarily valid. (We need to make sure that we preserve that distinction here and elsewhere — ill-formed must cause an error; invalid could be handled differently according to the implementation, eg distinguishing between deprecated and non-deprecated.

Author: Should this say "well-formed" then? 

I note that ICU and Intl both accept (well-formed) garbage here without error, partly as a guard against future code assignments requiring global software updates to work.

Author: Actually, made the change and added a note.

Reviewer: Thanks, the change is good.

- `compactDisplay` (this option only has meaning when combined with the option `notation=compact`)
   - `short` (default)
   - `long`
- `notation`
   - `standard` (default)
   - `compact`
- `numberingSystem`
   - valid [Unicode Number System Identifier](https://cldr-smoke.unicode.org/spec/main/ldml/tr35.html#UnicodeNumberSystemIdentifier)
     (default is locale-specific)
- `currencySign`
  - `accounting`
  - `standard` (default)
- `currencyDisplay` (this option's values are derived from those in ICU [NumberFormatter.UnitWidth](https://unicode-org.github.io/icu-docs/apidoc/released/icu4j/com/ibm/icu/number/NumberFormatter.UnitWidth.html))
  - `narrow`
  - `short` (default)
  - `full`
  - `iso`
  - `formal`
  - `variant`

>   - `none` (this is called `hidden` in ICU)

Reviewer 2: I continue to object to using a different source for this one single function option, when all the other options for all the other functions are using TC39 Intl as their source. Using this set of option values unnecessarily breaks from our otherwise well established patterns.

Author: We discussed this in yesterday's call (which you weren't able to attend). The challenge here is that currency formatting has been greatly improved in CLDR (which is reflected by the changes in ICU) after `Intl.NumberFormat` was created. Those changes have not yet materialized in TC39, but really are needed. FWIW, there is continuing evolution here. To wit, there are a number of currencies with more than one symbol (some of which are `formal` and some of which are `variant`). These symbols need to be selectable and, when selected, can result in different formatting patterns.

The poster child for this is the Turkish Lira, which has a newfangled symbol, which displays on the left thusly: `₺123.456,79` , but which is very often rendered using the older ASCII symbol "TL":

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/b6af582b-b290-42fc-b3bc-38a612f7f811)

The discussion yesterday recognized that there are more options here than in Intl, but that implementations are only required to accept all these keywords--not to provide different results based on them. Intl provides `code`, `symbol`, `narrowSymbol`, and `name`. We could reasonably rename thusly:

| Proposed Above | Intl Equivalent | Suggested | Comments |
|:---:|:---:|:---:|---|
| `narrow` | `narrowSymbol` | `narrow` | No need to be extra verbose |
| `short` | `symbol` | `symbol` | (default) `symbol` is consistent with user expectations |
| `full` | `name` | `name` | ICU's name is actually `FULL_NAME`. Can be misleading, e.g. JPY renders as `123,457円` |
| `iso` | `code` | `code` | `code` might be better because some codes are not ISO4217 |
| `formal` | n/a | `formal` | Variations such as `TRD` => `NT$` |
| `variant` | n/a | `variant` | Variations such as the `TRY` one illustrated above |
| `none` | n/a | `none` | Frequently used for columns of currency values |

Would that rename work for you?

Author: I did the rename just now (in bbc7091) but am looking for @eemeli's feedback

> in JavaScript's `Intl.NumberFormat`.

> [!NOTE]
> The option `select` does not accept the value `ordinal` because selecting
> currency values using ordinal rules makes no sense.

The following options and their values are required to be available on the function `:currency`:
- `select`
   -  `plural` (default)
   -  `exact`
- `currency`
   - well-formed [Unicode Currency Identifier](https://cldr-smoke.unicode.org/spec/main/ldml/tr35.html#UnicodeCurrencyIdentifier)
     (no default)
- `compactDisplay` (this option only has meaning when combined with the option `notation=compact`)
   - `short` (default)
   - `long`
- `notation`
   - `standard` (default)
   - `compact`
- `numberingSystem`
   - valid [Unicode Number System Identifier](https://cldr-smoke.unicode.org/spec/main/ldml/tr35.html#UnicodeNumberSystemIdentifier)
     (default is locale-specific)
- `currencySign`
  - `accounting`
  - `standard` (default)
- `currencyDisplay` (this option's values are derived from those in ICU [NumberFormatter.UnitWidth](https://unicode-org.github.io/icu-docs/apidoc/released/icu4j/com/ibm/icu/number/NumberFormatter.UnitWidth.html))

>   - `narrow`

Reviewer 2: @aphillips comments on this in https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/915#discussion_r1829540496 with:
> No need to be extra verbose

The need here is for consistency. We should not be editorialising our source materials like this, and creating unnecessary inconsistencies.

I would also argue that "narrowSymbol" is much more clearly narrower than "symbol", and so without looking up the meanings in some source this makes it clearer which of "US$" and "$" is which, as otherwise a reader could more easily presume that the former is a "narrow" name, and the latter the "symbol".

```suggestion
  - `narrowSymbol`
```

Author: I'll buy your argument and am committing your suggestion. I'll note that `narrowSymbol`/`symbol` don't necessarily produce `$` and `US$`---it really depends on the locale.

- `select`
   -  `plural` (default)
   -  `exact`
- `currency`
   - well-formed [Unicode Currency Identifier](https://cldr-smoke.unicode.org/spec/main/ldml/tr35.html#UnicodeCurrencyIdentifier)
     (no default)
- `compactDisplay` (this option only has meaning when combined with the option `notation=compact`)
   - `short` (default)
   - `long`
- `notation`
   - `standard` (default)
   - `compact`
- `numberingSystem`
   - valid [Unicode Number System Identifier](https://cldr-smoke.unicode.org/spec/main/ldml/tr35.html#UnicodeNumberSystemIdentifier)
     (default is locale-specific)
- `currencySign`
  - `accounting`
  - `standard` (default)
- `currencyDisplay` (this option's values are derived from those in ICU [NumberFormatter.UnitWidth](https://unicode-org.github.io/icu-docs/apidoc/released/icu4j/com/ibm/icu/number/NumberFormatter.UnitWidth.html))
  - `narrowSymbol`
  - `symbol` (default)
  - `name`
  - `code`
  - `formal`
  - `variant`
  - `none` (this is called `hidden` in ICU)
- `useGrouping`
  - `auto` (default)
  - `always`
  - `never`
  - `min2`
- `minimumIntegerDigits`
  - ([digit size option](#digit-size-options), default: `1`)

> - `fractionDigits` (unlike number/integer formats, the fraction digits for currency formatting are fixed)
>   - `auto` (default) (the number of digits used by the currency)
>   - `hideIfWhole` (see note above)
>   - ([digit size option](#digit-size-options))
> - `minimumSignificantDigits`
>   - ([digit size option](#digit-size-options))
> - `maximumSignificantDigits`
>   - ([digit size option](#digit-size-options))

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `fractionDigits` (unlike number/integer formats, the fraction digits for currency formatting are fixed)
  - `auto` (default) (the number of digits used by the currency)
  - ([digit size option](#digit-size-options))
- `minimumSignificantDigits`
  - ([digit size option](#digit-size-options))
- `maximumSignificantDigits`
  - ([digit size option](#digit-size-options))
- `trailingZeroDisplay`
  - `auto` (default)
  - `stripIfInteger`
```

Author: I'm going to add this, but it will need changes to the note text about digits. I'll push another change for that.

> [!NOTE]
> The option `select` does not accept the value `ordinal` because selecting
> currency values using ordinal rules makes no sense.

The following options and their values are required to be available on the function `:currency`:
- `select`
   -  `plural` (default)
   -  `exact`
- `currency`
   - well-formed [Unicode Currency Identifier](https://cldr-smoke.unicode.org/spec/main/ldml/tr35.html#UnicodeCurrencyIdentifier)
     (no default)
- `compactDisplay` (this option only has meaning when combined with the option `notation=compact`)
   - `short` (default)
   - `long`
- `notation`
   - `standard` (default)
   - `compact`
- `numberingSystem`
   - valid [Unicode Number System Identifier](https://cldr-smoke.unicode.org/spec/main/ldml/tr35.html#UnicodeNumberSystemIdentifier)
     (default is locale-specific)
- `currencySign`
  - `accounting`
  - `standard` (default)
- `currencyDisplay` (this option's values are derived from those in ICU [NumberFormatter.UnitWidth](https://unicode-org.github.io/icu-docs/apidoc/released/icu4j/com/ibm/icu/number/NumberFormatter.UnitWidth.html))
  - `narrowSymbol`
  - `symbol` (default)
  - `name`
  - `code`
  - `formal`
  - `variant`

>   - `none` (this is called `hidden` in ICU)

Reviewer 2: Is the fallback behaviour for formatting currencies with no variant documented somewhere?

>   - `none` (this is called `hidden` in ICU)

Reviewer: Yes, the fallback for each element with `alt=...` is documented. It is normally the unmarked element (ie, without the `alt=...`), but in some documented cases (notably locale display names) it may be constructed.

>   - `none` (this is called `hidden` in ICU)

Author: Note that `variant` is restricted (currently) to currency symbols. 

The usability problem is that when a user writes the source message, she's not going to know about the need for `variant`. At Amazon, our currency formatter had enums for the presentation format ("in sentence", "standalone", "compact", "iso code", and such) that correspond to specific user interface use cases. Various locale/currency/site configurations then produced the correct symbol/pattern in each of these. This was helpful because it let us do one thing with (e.g.) `TRY` in the Türkiye site and different thing elsewhere without the developer (or translator) having to know whether a variant existed and, further, whether it was desired or not. Often "what to do" will depend entirely on which currency and which presentation case is wanted ☹️ 

The enums here are taken from `NumberFormatter` (and `Intl.NumberFormat`), which are procedural APIs for getting this effect. They are wrong for `MessageFormat`, I think, because MF is supposed to hide procedural gorp like that. As currently speced, the developer to know that they want the `variant` symbol all the time (unlikely) or the translator to put it there (possibly at odds with the display use case) for specific locales (and not generally knowing the currency). You don't want to have to ever write:

```
.local $curCode = {$amount :get field=currency}
.match $curCode
TRY {{You have {$amount :currency currencyDisplay=variant} left in your account.}}
UAH {{You have {$amount :currency currencyDisplay=variant} left in your account.}}
NTD {{You have {$amount :currency currencyDisplay=formal} left in your account.}}
*   {{You have {$mount :currency} left in your account.}}
```

> class, or type for currency values, the implementation ought to provide
> a data structure, convenience function, or documentation on how to encode
> the value and currency code for formatting.
> For example, such an implementation might define a "currency operand"
> to include a key-value structure with specific keys to be the
> local currency operand, which might look like the following:
> ```
> {
>    "value": 123.45,
>    "currency": "EUR"
> }
> ```

#### Options

Some options do not have default values defined in this specification.
The defaults for these options are implementation-dependent.
In general, the default values for such options depend on the locale, 
the currency,
the value of other options, or all of these.

Fraction digits for currency values behave differently than for other numeric formatters.
The number of fraction digits displayed is usually set by the currency used.
For example, USD uses 2 fraction digits, while JPY uses none.
Setting some other number of `fractionDigits` allows greater precision display
(such as when performing currency conversions or other specialized operations)
or disabling fraction digits if set to `0`.

> The _option_ `trailingZeroDisplay` has a value `stripIfInteger` that is useful 
> for displaying currencies with their fraction digits removed when the fraction
> part of the _operand_ is zero.
> This is sometimes used in _messages_ to make the displayed value omit the fraction part
> automatically.
> > For example, this _message_:
> > ```
> > The special price is {$price :currency trailingZeroDisplay=stripIfInteger}.
> > ```
> > When used with the value `5.00 USD` in the `en-US` locale displays as:
> > ```
> > The special price is $5.
> > ```
> > But like this when when value is `5.01 USD`:
> > ```
> > The special price is $5.01.
> > ```
> 

Reviewer 2: Nitpick: This seems a bit superfluous as we don't explain other options like this, but I don't object to including it.

```suggestion
```

Author: We could put this in the user guide. I included it here because it might otherwise be mysterious.

  - ([digit size option](#digit-size-options))
- `maximumSignificantDigits`
  - ([digit size option](#digit-size-options))
- `trailingZeroDisplay`
  - `auto` (default)
  - `stripIfInteger`
- `roundingPriority`
  - `auto` (default)
  - `morePrecision`
  - `lessPrecision`
- `roundingIncrement`
  - 1 (default), 2, 5, 10, 20, 25, 50, 100, 200, 250, 500, 1000, 2000, 2500, and 5000
- `roundingMode`
  - `ceil`
  - `floor`
  - `expand`
  - `trunc`
  - `halfCeil`
  - `halfFloor`
  - `halfExpand` (default)
  - `halfTrunc`
  - `halfEven`

If the _operand_ of the _expression_ is an implementation-defined type,
such as the _resolved value_ of an _expression_ with a `:currency` _annotation_,
it can include option values.
These are included in the resolved option values of the _expression_,
with _options_ on the _expression_ taking priority over any option values of the _operand_.

> For example, the _placeholder_ in this _message_:
> ```
> .input {$n :currency currency=USD trailingZeroDisplay=stripIfInteger}
> {{{$n :currency currencySign=accounting}}}
> ```
> would be formatted with the resolved options
> `{ currencySign: 'accounting', trailingZeroDisplay: 'stripIfInteger', currency: 'USD' }`.

> 

Reviewer: Question.

It appears reasonable to allow composition of currency with numeric values, eg:

> .input {$n :number }
> {{{$n :currency currencySign=accounting}}}

or

> .input {$n :integer }
> {{{$n :currency currencySign=accounting}}}

whereby any options on the numeric functions are ignored for the currency formatting.

Not a blocker, since this can be done later.

Reviewer: Sorry, I fat-fingered. I had copied the example, and meant to delete the currencySign option, and instead deleted the currencyCode option!

I had also meant just composition one way, from a number to a currency amount, as you have it:

```
.input {$n :number useGrouping=never numberingSystem=Latn}
.local $c = {$n :currency currencyCode=INR}
{{This prints in rupees without lakhs (or other groupings) and with Latin digits: {$c}}}
```

I hadn't meant from a currency amount to a number. 
```
.input {$c :currency}
.local $n = {$c :number useGrouping=never numberingSystem=Latn}
{{This prints just the number part of a currency amount: {$n}}}
```

#### Resolved Value

The _resolved value_ of an _expression_ with a `:currency` _function_
contains an implementation-defined currency value
of the _operand_ of the annotated _expression_,
together with the resolved options' values.

#### Selection

> The _function_ `:currency` performs selection as described in [Number Selection](#number-selection) below.

Reviewer 2: While considering #933, I realised that plural selection on currency values depends on being able to introspect the fraction digits which are by default locale-dependent. The ICU FormattedNumber might do that automatically, but in other APIs the operation can get a bit trickier.

Author: It's not locale-dependent. It's **currency** dependent. This is why fraction digits are different in this function!

Reviewer: +1

> For example, in ICU4J, the type `com.ibm.icu.util.CurrencyAmount` can be used
> to set the amount and currency.

> [!NOTE]
> The `currency` is only required to be well-formed rather than checked for validity.
> This allows new currency codes to be defined 
> (there are many recent examples of this occuring).
> It also avoids requiring implementations to check currency codes for validity,
> although implementations are permitted to emit _Bad Option_ or _Bad Operand_ for invalid codes.

> > A well-formed currency code matches the regular expression `^[A-Z]{3}$`.

Author: The source on 341 says:

> Codes consisting of 3 ASCII letters that are or have been valid in ISO 4217, plus certain additional codes that are or have been in common use. The list of countries and time periods associated with each currency value is available in [Supplemental Currency Data](https://cldr-smoke.unicode.org/spec/main/ldml/tr35-numbers.html#Supplemental_Currency_Data), plus the default number of decimals.
>
> The XXX code is given a broader interpretation as Unknown or Invalid Currency.

This doesn't distinguish valid and well-formed. I suppose we might link [ISO4217](https://www.iso.org/standard/64758.html)'s "about" page. Not sure anyone defines well-formed as a distinct entity.

In practice, this defines an alpha3 code. I should probably use ABNF (since we use that everywhere else in our spec) to define it. I'll provide an edit.

> or the type `com.ibm.icu.util.CurrencyAmount` can be used to set the currency and related
> options (such as the number of fraction digits).

> ### Currency Operands

Reviewer 2: Having this section here seems odd. It would be better to have this text directly included in the "`:currency` Operands" section.

> or the type `com.ibm.icu.util.CurrencyAmount` can be used to set the currency and related
> options (such as the number of fraction digits).

### Currency Operands

> The _operand_ of the `:currency` function is an implementation-defined type that
> contains a number and a currency code
> or a map whose keys are `value` and `currency`.
> When the _operand_ is a map, the value of `value` MUST be a [Number Operand](#number-operands).
> When the _operand_ is a map, the value of `currency` MUST be either a 
> valid [Unicode Currency Identifier](https://cldr-smoke.unicode.org/spec/main/ldml/tr35.html#UnicodeCurrencyIdentifier)
> or an implementation-defined currency type.

Reviewer 2: We should not require support for such a map value, but leave it to implementations.
```suggestion
The _operand_ of the `:currency` function is an implementation-defined type that
contains a numerical `value` and a `currency` code.
The value of `currency` MUST be either a 
valid [Unicode Currency Identifier](https://cldr-smoke.unicode.org/spec/main/ldml/tr35.html#UnicodeCurrencyIdentifier)
or an implementation-defined currency type.
```

Author: Fair enough. I'm going to merge your suggestion and then modify is slightly to allow multiple types (my--and thus your--current text implies only one type is allowed, which is not the intention)

> [!NOTE]
> For example, in ICU4J, the type `com.ibm.icu.util.CurrencyAmount` can be used
> to set the amount and currency.

The _operand_ MAY be a [Number Operand](#number-operands), as long as the option `currency`
is provided.

> The option `currency` MUST NOT be used to override the currency of an implementation-defined type
> or of a map containing a `currency` field.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The option `currency` MUST NOT be used to override the currency of an implementation-defined type.
```
